The Smith–Waterman algorithm performs local sequence alignment; that is,
for determining similar regions between two strings of nucleic acid sequences
or protein sequences. Instead of looking at the entire sequence, the Smith–
Waterman algorithm compares segments of all possiblelengths.
Smith–Waterman algorithm aligns two sequences by matches/mismatches
(also known as substitutions), insertions, and deletions. Both insertions and
deletions are the operations that introduce gaps, which are represented by
dashes. The Smith–Waterman algorithm has severalsteps:
1) Initialize the scoring matrix. The dimensions of the scoring matrix are
1+length of each sequence respectively. All the elements of the first row and
the first column are set to 0. The extra first row and first column make it
possible to align one sequence to another at any position, and setting them to
0 makes the terminal gap free frompenalty.
2) Scoring. Score each element from left to right, top to bottom in the matri.
The value of each cell is determined from the cell which has the maximum
value among the cell just above it, or to its leftt or diagonal to it. If the cell
which has the maximum value is diagonal to the computing cell we add the
value of the diagonal cell and the match value or mismatch value in case of
match and mismatch respectively. If the cell which has the maximum value is
the cell above it or to its left, we add the gap value to the maximum value. If
none of the scores are positive, this element gets a 0. Otherwise the highest
score is used and the source of that score isrecorded.
3) Traceback. Starting at the element with the highest score, traceback based
on the source of each score recursively, until 0 is encountered. The segments
that have the highest similarity score based on the given scoring system is
generated in this process. While performing traceback we write the elements 
12
we insert a gap denoted by a dash. If the value of that cell came from the cell
above it we introduce a gap at that position in the sequence which is written
horizontally else if the value of that cell came from the cell to its left we
introduce a gap at that position in the sequence which is written vertically. We
stop when a 0 is encountered.
